---
layout: post
title: AfterWords- Red Rising by Pierce Brown, first half
excerpt: "LoneRead afterthoughts on the first half of Red Rising."
modified: 2015-01-11
categories: books
tags: [lonereads,reading,books,science fiction,red rising,pierce brown]
image:
  feature: lr-banner.png
comments: true
share: true
---

This week we've read the first half of *Red Rising* by Pierce Brown,
one of the best books of 2014 according to Goodreads and also a 
*New York Times* bestseller.
*Red Rising* is a science fiction book with broad appeal that takes place on Mars. 
It has been compared to the Hunger Games, Ender's Game, Game of Thrones,
Lord of the Flies, etc.
This is the first book of the 
[*Red Rising Trilogy*](http://www.pierce-brown.com/red-rising-trilogy.html). 

### Synopsis

The first half synopsis covers Parts I (Slave) and II (Reborn). 

##### Part I (Slave)

Darrow is a Red, the lowest of the classes, and he is a 16-year-old Helldiver 
in the mines,
working to prepare Mars to be habitable for future generations.  
He takes a big risk with a gas pocket
against the orders of his elders, doesn't blow up, and makes a huge haul. 
Everyone is led to believe
that his clan, the Lambdas have won the Laurel, securing a great amount of food
over the usual less than minimal rations,
over the Gammas, who are the standing winners.
Darrow's wife Eo is less confident, and we find out the Gammas have won again 
and will always win.

Eo takes Darrow to a secret forest, where Reds must be forbidden, and Darrow
lies in grass and sees the stars for the first time.  
Eo tries to convince Darrow that the Reds have earned this land and are slaves
to the Society.  Darrow doesn't care if life is unfair, "if we have family,
that is all that should matter."  Leaving the gardens, they are caught by
the Tinpots, thrown into cells, and flogged.  As Eo takes her flogging after 
Darrow, she sings the forbidden song that will mean her death, like Darrow's
father who danced the forbidden dance.  Eo is hanged, Darrow pulls her feet
to break her neck in Mars's weak gravity.  Darrow cuts down Eo and buries
her in the garden, knowing he will also be hanged for this.  Uncle Narol
pulls Darrow's feet at his hanging.

##### Part II (Reborn)

Darrow awakens buried in a mine.  Uncle Narol had drugged him and helped 
fake his death.  Darrow meets members of the Sons of Ares, a rebel group,
and is taken to Dancer.  Dancer tells Darrow that the video of Eo's death
has been broadcasted all over the planet by rebel hackers, and she has become
a martyr for their cause.  Dancer says he can give Darrow justice.  He shows
Darrow a beautiful inhabited city on Mars's surface, 
where he expected the barren desert shown below to the Reds on the holoCan,
and Darrow realizes he has really been a slave.  

Dancer takes Darrow to Mickey, a 12-fingered Carver- extreme body artist/surgeon.
He wants Mickey to carve Darrow into a Gold and good enough to be accepted
to the Gold's Insitute and become a Peerless
Scarred, commanding fleets.  Mickey attaches the sigils of the Gold to Darrow,
including brain surgery that leaves Darrow in a coma for two weeks. 
Darrow undergoes painful surgeries to reinforce his skeleton, replace his eyes
with Gold eyes, and replace his hair.  He uses a concentraction machine to tear
and build his muscles.  He speed-listens to learn literary works while he sleeps.
Matteo helps him with his accent, vocabulary, and manners to help him pass as a Gold.
Darrow has an embarrassing episode learning to ride horses in front of a female Gold.
He takes the test and weeks later learns that he is accepted to the Institute after
only missing one question on the written exam, which prompted investigation.

Darrow leaves for Agea on a shuttle to the institute.  We are introduced to several
other Gold students including Cassius au Bellona, from a very distinguished family,
and Sevro, a lower Gold with an attitude.  During the Draft, when students are selected
to join a House, Darrow is quickly selected to House Mars.  At dinner, we meet other
House Mars members including Titus, a brute, and Julian, Cassius's brother.  That 
evening Darrow is woken with a beating and dragged into a stone room for the first
event, the "Passage," in which all students have been paired off to kill the weaker
half of the students.  Darrow has been thrown in the room with Julian,
who does not seem to realize that only one of them will survive.  Darrow kills Julian,
with great anguish and collapses in tears.  

### AfterWords - Questions and Thoughts to Drink Over

##### How much force does it take to break a neck during a hanging?

How horrible would it be to have to pull someone's feet for them to die quickly in 
a hanging?  Really horrible.  Is that necessary?  Gravity on Earth is 9.8 m/s<sup>2</sup>,
and on Mars it is 3.7 m/s<sup>2</sup>.  Must be somewhere in between there then.
How guilty must Darrow feel that he survived while Eo died, partially at his hand?

##### In theFuture, will newWords be capitalized weirdly?

clawDrill, scanCrew, wedAge, slingBlade, haulBacks, gravLift, horizonTram, 
headTalks, duroArmor, pulseBlade, holoCan, torchShip, bioSilk, nanoGlass, 
gravBoots, ripWings, forceGenerator, drillBoy, torchShips, pulseShield...what is with these
words?  I feel like I am inside a computer program and these are all function names.  
Is that one of the keys to a successful 
sci-fi/fantasy book?  Inventing words?  Inventing words and easy to pronounce but novel 
character names (Darrow, Katniss, Ender...)?

##### "Patience is the better part of valor.  And obedience the better part of humanity."

Is patience a prerequisite for valor?  Maybe yes.  Valor implies accomplishment in the face
of a huge obstacle, and patience is generally necessary to accomplish huge feats.  Is
obedience the better part of humanity?  Better for whom?

##### What did Eo say to her sister Dio as her last words?

Ugh, why don't we find out??  What could she have said that makes Dio cry out even more?
Why does Dio look uncomfortable and not tell Darrow what she said when he asks her
as his last request?  Are we going to come back to this later?  I need to know.

##### "An empire cannot be destroyed from without till it is destroyed from within."

If successful, are Darrow and the Sons of Ares going to be any better than the Golds?
How 'Gold' is Darrow going to become?  Can they destroy an empire or just replace it?
Speaking of destroying from within... 

### Drink pairing

Remember, it's not drinking alone if you drink with a good book.  Read more
for our [drink pairing suggestions for *Red Rising*]({{site.url}}/brews/first-lone-brews-2015).
This week we enjoyed [Great Lakes Brewing Company Christmas Ale]({{site.url}}/brews/red-rising-1-christmas-ale).


